---
layout: post
title:  "Internet Explorer is up to date...now what?"
description:
tags:
- State of the web
- Front end development
- Backwards compatibility
date: 2016-02-28
---

It's been a month or so since Microsoft announced the end of support for its older Internet Explorer products but I feel as though the excitement hasn't quite sunk in with everyone. That's why I'm here to tell you all the things you get to be happy about.

### Banks, hospitals, and schools are upgrading!

These institutions are famous for being behind the times and not upgrading to the latest technology, but they are upgrading anyways. The end of support message must have scared them into it. This means that a huge chunk of the old browser traffic visiting your site is about to disappear.

Let me say that again just to make sure it sinks in. **The percent of visitors to your site with out-of-date browsers is about to drop significantly** This is incredible news!

Deleting code is very high up on my list of favourite things to do while programming, and I'm about to tell you how to delete A LOT of code.

**Disclaimer:** You should keep an eye on your analytics before you do any of the following since a lot of these are *necessary* for older browsers to function.

### Browser detection

Remember these tags?

{% highlight html %}
<!--[if IE 7]><![endif]-->
<!--[if IE 8]><![endif]-->
<!--[if IE 9]><![endif]-->
{% endhighlight %}

Gone! There goes 25% of your base template.

Goodbye **modernizr**! Browser and feature detection are obsolete since all the supported browsers have video and canvas, which were the main reason to detect the user's browser.

### Polyfills

All the browsers now support HTML5 out of the box, which means **html5shiv** is dead. Take care, good friend.

**Web sockets** now work out of the box, so there is no need to include WebSocketMain.swf (the flash fallback).

### Form validation

**HTML5 native form validation** allows you to delete a whole chunk of Javascript form validation and CSS error classes. All you do is set your field input type or set required fields and you're all set! Any form submission will trigger elegant form error notifications.

### CSS Changes

This news means that **autoprefixer** has become mostly obsolete.

Not only that, your CSS just got a whole lot cleaner. Things to look at:

- opacity and RGBA
  - Don't forget to delete those PNGs you included to get transparency!
- background fallbacks
  - That's dead code now
- placeholders
- border-radius
- gradients
- box-shadow
- **media queries**
  - There's no excuse not to be responsive now.
- **SVGs**
  - That means icons and faster images.
- CSS Transitions
  - Get rid of that Javascript animation code
- **flexbox**
  - floating divs were never meant to be

### Javascript Changes

Were you like me and you stuck with the **1.x jquery** because of support back to IE 6? No more! It's time to upgrade to 2.x!

The **async attribute** is fully supported now. If you aren't using this yet, you're about to half your page load time.

Some really cool features that every site needs to start looking at are:

- Web Workers
- requestAnimationFrame

Using these will increase page speed both when loading and at runtime.

### Conclusion

All us old developers need to forget a whole bunch of, now useless, information about supporting IE and everyone needs to refactor their front end code. Web development just got a whole lot more accessible and powerful.

If you weren't excited at the start of this post, hopefully you are now. Man! What a time to be alive.
