---
layout: post
title:  "Balance"
description: The word balance is often portrayed as an achieved serene state. I try to add depth to that definition.
tags:
- Words
date: 2018-12-28
---

The word balance is often displayed alongside a person doing a one-legged yoga pose in front of a sunset. This image conveys a sense of serenity; a relaxing singular state achieved after much practice. Although I don't disagree with this message entirely, I wanted to offer a different perspective on the word, hopefully achieving more depth and colour to the definition.

Recently the way I've been experiencing balance is anything but peaceful - an active and ongoing fight between opposing parties. The result of this fight may, and often is, perceived as beautiful, but the process can easily be anything but. In my life I have seen it take the form of a grueling and exhausting process.

From my limited time in yoga I've noticed that all the poses that involve balance are actually quite strenuous and anything but relaxing. Your muscles are flexed, fighting from both sides of your body allowing you to stay upright.

Similar things come up when you look at a gymnast on a balance beam, they are by no means relaxed. Their whole leg is flexed, core tight, body centered, their foot flexed around the bar holding on with all their will.

Perhaps I'm the only one who was tricked by all the sunsets and still life photography, but let me offer some other imagery that I feel also speak to the dynamics of balance, but I feel are under represented:
- An arm wrestle where both hands are stuck in one position, not necessarily the middle. That's right, no one said anything about equality.
- A stale mate in chess - no party can make a viable move that would lead them to win the game.
- Perpetual motion machines - a constant swaying of power that achieves something wonderful as a result.
- Our solar system - there is a constant push and pull between planets as we fly through space and repeat our cycle of orbits around the sun (knock on wood).
- Speaking much more abstractly, a repeating decimal in mathematics - every time more storage is added to the number (i.e. going from 16 decimal digits to 17) the new space is divided the same way.

With these new images in mind, I notice the following qualities in balance systems:
- The systems repeat themselves through a finite set of patterns
- All sides (a lot of balance systems involve more than two parties) are powerful and incapable of losing. They have a response to every possible move their "opponents" in the system can make which allows them to keep swaying within the same positions
- New parties entering the system would cause a redistribution of power, sometimes drastic

Depending on the system, balance can actually be an incredibly infuriating thing for members of the system to deal with. A game that requires a winner cannot be balanced, otherwise there will be no end. The above observations helped me realize new tools for throwing off balance in this sort of system.

If every move has a viable response, and the responses are well known, then a new move or an existing move used in a new way could make the opponent select the incorrect response, thus yielding an advantage. This is equivalent to adding a new member to the system to be considered. Both sides need to learn how the new element affects the system and what the appropriate responses are. If timed right a play like this could throw off the distribution of power momentarily, perhaps enough for you to win the game. This leads me to believe that creativity and surprise are the most powerful tools you have as a member of a struggle for balance.

I hope this new perspective on balance is as informative for you as it was for me. It has me thinking about board games, dueling games, work-life balance, and even communities I'm a part of. Take care and good luck in your struggles.
